Audiovisual (AV) is electronic media possessing  both a sound and a visual component, such as slide-tape presentations,[1] films, television programs, corporate conferencing, church services, and live theater productions.

Audiovisual service providers frequently offer web streaming, video conferencing, and live broadcast services.[2]

Computer-based audiovisual equipment is often used in education, with many schools and universities installing projection equipment and using interactive whiteboard technology.

Generally, residential audiovisual encompasses in-ceiling speakers, flat panel TVs, projectors, and projector screens. This could include lighting, blinds, cinema rooms, etc.[3]

The professional audiovisual industry is a multibillion-dollar industry, comprising manufacturers, dealers, systems integrators, consultants, programmers, presentations professionals, and technology managers of audiovisual products and services.

Commercial audiovisual can be a lengthy process to install and configure correctly. Boardroom audiovisuals can be installed for a number of reasons and often is due to the executives of the organization or business needing to have meetings with colleagues, customers and suppliers around the world. When creating an array of boardrooms for customers it beneficial to balance the pattern from the audio and microphone so there is no degradation in sound quality for the individuals listening.[4]

The proliferation of audiovisual communications technologies, including sound, video, lighting, display, and projection systems is evident in many sectors of society. This includes business, education, government, the military, healthcare, retail environments, worship, sports and entertainment, hospitality, restaurants, and museums. The application of audiovisual systems can be found in collaborative conferencing (which includes video-conferencing, audio-conferencing, web-conferencing, and data-conferencing), presentation rooms, auditoriums and lecture halls, command and control centers, digital signage, and more. Concerts and corporate events are among the most obvious venues where audiovisual equipment is used in a staged environment. Providers of this type of service are known as rental and staging companies, although they may also be served by an in-house technology team (e.g., in a hotel or conference center).
