

Star Wars is an American epic space-opera media franchise, centered on a film series created by George Lucas that includes Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980), and Return of the Jedi (1983). The series depicts the adventures of various characters "a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away". Many derivative Star Wars works have been produced in conjunction with, between, and after the original trilogy of films, and later installments. This body of work was collectively known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe for decades.

In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for $4.06 billion.[1][2][3] In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the Expanded Universe material as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canon to the franchise. The company's focus would be shifted towards a restructured Star Wars canon based on new material.[4][5][6] The first new canon adult novel was Star Wars: A New Dawn by John Jackson Miller, published in September 2014.[7]

This is a list of original novels, novel adaptations, original junior novels, junior novel adaptations, young readers, and short stories in the Star Wars franchise. This list does not include journals, graphic novels or comic books, which can be found in the list of Star Wars comic books. Reference books and roleplaying gamebooks can be found at the list of Star Wars reference books.

The novelizations offer an alternate take on the events of the movies. Many include discarded or slightly altered plot-lines. It should be remembered that those published before 25 April 2014 are considered Legends like all other media.

Since 2014, the official Star Wars canon includes all of the movie episodes, The Clone Wars film and the television shows Star Wars: The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels, and Star Wars Resistance, as well as any books, comics, and video games published after April 2014.

Since 2014, various short stories have been published in Star Wars Insider.[21][22]

The collection Tales from a Galaxy Far, Far Away: Aliens is part of the Journey to Star Wars: The Force Awakens promotional campaign. Some stories were originally published as individual e-books, and later collected with other new stories. However, they were all published together as a book called Star Wars: Tales From a Galaxy Far, Far Away

Canon storybooks for younger readers that are shorter than a standard novel or young adult novel.

This body of work represents the original Star Wars expanded universe, which was rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.[5] Beginning with the 1999 release of Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace, Lucasfilm has divided its titles by fictional "era" with symbols designating such.

This era contains stories taking place more than 25,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

This era contains stories taking place 25,000 to 1,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

This era contains stories taking place within 100 years before Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

This era contains stories taking place within five years after the events of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

Vinyl record only, no book.

24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

24-page illustrated children's books by Golden Books

In 2015, the original six Star Wars films were adapted as Little Golden Books. In 2017, A New Hope was also released as a Big Golden Book. Additionally, Solo: A Star Wars Story and the sequel trilogy were adapted. Many other original titles featuring scenes from throughout the saga have been released, including I Am a Padawan by Ashley Eckstein. An upcoming release will adapt The Mandalorian.[23]

This era takes place from five to 25 years after Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

This era takes place within 25 to 39 years after Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

This era takes place 40+ years after Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

These books contain short Star Wars stories from several notable science-fiction authors with stories that span different timelines.
