Anthony Joseph Gilroy (born September 11, 1956) is an American filmmaker. He wrote the screenplays for the first four films of the Bourne series, the initial trilogy of which Matt Damon starred in, and directed the fourth film of the franchise which starred Jeremy Renner. He received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director and for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for Michael Clayton. Gilroy wrote and directed Duplicity, starring Julia Roberts and Clive Owen, and co-wrote Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.

Gilroy was born in Manhattan, New York City, the son of Ruth Dorothy (née Gaydos), a sculptor and writer, and Frank D. Gilroy, an award-winning playwright, director, and movie producer, who received the Tony Award for Best Play and the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for his play The Subject Was Roses in 1965. He is the brother of screenwriter Dan Gilroy and editor John Gilroy.[1][2] Through his father, he is of Italian, Irish and German descent.[3]
He has two children, Sam and Kathryn, and is married to Susan Gilroy.

Gilroy was raised in Washingtonville, New York.[4] He graduated from Washingtonville High School in 1974[5][6] at 16 years old[7] and attended Boston University for two years before dropping out to concentrate on his music career.[4][8]

Gilroy has written many scripts for film, starting with the script for The Cutting Edge in 1992. This was followed by Dolores Claiborne in 1995 and The Devil's Advocate in 1997. He was one of five credited writers on Michael Bay's Armageddon, the highest-grossing film of 1998. Gilroy's next script was Proof of Life in 2000. In 2002, 2003 and 2007 he wrote the screenplays for The Bourne Identity, The Bourne Supremacy and The Bourne Ultimatum, and wrote and directed the next installment of the Bourne series, The Bourne Legacy (2012).

Also in 2007, he wrote and directed the film Michael Clayton, which won an Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay,[9] and was nominated for several Academy Awards including screenplay. In 2009, Gilroy wrote and directed the romantic comedy spy film Duplicity, starring Clive Owen, Julia Roberts and Tom Wilkinson. Gilroy is set, along with The Bourne Ultimatum co-screenwriter Scott Z. Burns, to write the script for the upcoming film Army of Two, based on the video game from EA Montreal.

In September 2013, Gilroy delivered a screenwriting lecture as part of the BAFTA and BFI Screenwriters' Lecture Series.[10]

In 2016, Gilroy co-wrote the script to the sci-fi war film Rogue One, directed by Gareth Edwards. It is a prequel to the 1977 classic Star Wars. Gilroy shared writing duties with fellow filmmaker Chris Weitz.

In 2018, he received a Distinguished Screenwriter Award from the Austin Film Festival.[11]

Gilroy's directorial debut was in 2007, when he directed the film Michael Clayton, which his brother John Gilroy edited. The film was nominated for seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Actor. In addition to its Edgar Award, the film won one Oscar, for Best Supporting Actress (Tilda Swinton). The film was a box-office success, grossing over $92 million worldwide.

He also wrote and directed his next film, Duplicity, released March 20, 2009, and starring Clive Owen, Julia Roberts and Tom Wilkinson. He then took over as director of the next entry in the Bourne series as well as co-writing; the film, The Bourne Legacy, was released August 10, 2012, starring Jeremy Renner, Rachel Weisz, Edward Norton, Joan Allen, and Albert Finney.

He is returning to the Star Wars franchise to serve as showrunner for the Cassian Andor show after Stephen Schiff left the show. Gilroy has set to write a pilot and direct multiple episodes for the TV series.[12] 
In September 2020, he stepped down as director for the series, but remains attached as a writer and executive producer. Toby Haynes will replace him as director.[13]

Also uncredited rewrites screenplay for The Woman in the Window (2021).[14]
